# ConCat: A System Design for Mediachain PME [Pre-critical Mass Era]

## Architecture

The system builds on the RSS model, whereby individual peers maintain
and publish their own feeds for each namespace they participate in.
Readers can receive those feeds directly from publishers, either by
polling or by subscribing to a pubsub interface. Peers are free to
aggregate and republish any feed they subscribe to, thus creating a
network of concatinative feeds (hence ConCat).

In order to be discoverable, publishers advertise their feeds to
directory servers. Directory servers collect these advertisements
into the Universe, a comprehensive but uncurated directory where all
known peers and their feeds can be found.

In order to aid moderation and promotion of authoritative sources,
peer operators may elect to publicly identify their nodes.
Identification utilizes operator credentials backed by external
identity providers (blockstack, keybase, etc). In this way publishers
can be directly connected to real world entities and carry their
associated reputation with them.

The public identification allows directory servers to provide the next
stratum of discovery, by virtue of the Contrib directory. This
directory lists only verified nodes and allows discovery based on
operator identities (eg organizations, social media handles, keybase
user names and so on).

The final stratum of discovery, is the Glam directory. In this space,
directory servers recognize and promote autoritative sources and their
namespaces. The recommendation model can be bootstrapped by utilizing
operator identities with a web of trust, whereby entities trusted by
directory servers can issue scoped endorsements for moderators and
publishers

## Peer Nodes

## The Directory

## Identity and Endorsement

## Implementation Notes

